---
title: "26"
date: 2023-08-20T11:01:03+07:00
draft: false
toc: false
images:
categories:
tags:
  - personal
---

My birthday came a few days ago. On the day's morning, I received a few good
wishes from my close ones, and it felt pretty great. A not-so-fancy birthday
party was thrown by them also made me feel happy.

One part of me thought that a birthday is just another day, while another part
wanted to write something which makes the day more special. The latter part won,
and I guess I am going to write about some discoveries that I had for the year
(only on writing this that I realize every year I have tons of discoveries, and
it is a good idea to write about them to look back).

I feel like the main theme of the year's discovery is on what I want for my
self, and my romantic relationship, and my career.

On what I want for my self, I guess I have to tell the context on how I found my
childhood trauma---childhood emotional neglect, or CEN---first. At first, I
stumbled upon BoJack Horseman (really great show by the way), and found myself
relating to Judah, who in on the spectrum (or has ASD, autistic spectrum
disorder). Relating to ASD, I found that I might have "alexithymia". It is a
term in Psychiatry for "the inability to recognize or describe one's own
emotions". CEN and the trait helped me explaining a large part of my behaviors,
and ultimately led me to some soul searching for what I actually want.

- As an action, it is *create*.
- As a noun, it is *creation*.
- As a state of living, it is *being creative*.

I enjoy making things from scratch, whether it is in writing or in coding or in
solving a mathematics puzzle by myself. I am pleased in seeing my creations
work.

About what I want from my romantic relationship, it can be coined in two terms:

- *Connection*: connection is the sharing of common values. I assume that
  different people have different specific words when they try to explain what
  is connection for them. For me, the term contains *knowledge* and *openness*.

- *Safeness*: my definition of safeness is kind of synonymous to *trust* or
  *accountability*, but I guess the usage is to emphasize the feeling that I
  want to have when I am next to the person.

Earlier in my career, I thought of money and growth as the most important
things, but only recently that came up with *sustainability*, or how long can I
stay at the place. I switched job a few times, and had enough my share of
interviewing, and even though I feel that my technical knowledge breadth is good
enough, I want to have some depth, too.

Previously, the equation is:

```javascript
job =
    0.5 * money +
    0.5 * growth
```

Now my equation is:

```javascript
job =
    0.4 * sustainability +
    0.3 * money +
    0.3 * growth
```

In the end, despite all this clarification, I still take by heart this quote:

> Everybody has plans until they get punched in the face.

One part of me feels that there is an explanation for everything. Another says
that life happens purely by chance. What we do is play the cards we are dealt.
We tell the story after everything is done by trying to make sense of the random
events. For me right now, it is 50 50. I strive to explain everything, but I am
going to accept the randomness.

See you next year!

