---
title: "On Not Losing Hope"
date: 2023-06-12T09:46:10+07:00
draft: true
toc: false
images:
categories:
tags:
  - interview
---

After I got laid off from my last job, I took a 2-month break, and spent nearly
4 months on job searching. I think what I struggled with the most was to
maintain hope for a seemingly unending cycle of research-apply-interview, when
receiving a lot of rejections and ghostings.

People say that the market is bad right now, especially for new
graduates/fresher developers, and I can somewhat relate to that even as a
mid-level developer. I did not do a formal data collection nor analysis, but I
had >50 applications, with around 12 interviews, and less than 4 final rounds,
and offers that are lower than my current earning. The recent experience is
obviously harder and more selective than what my past experiences were. Because
of that, imagining a much harsher situation for new graduates is not hard.

I also went through one of the most gut-wrenching experience at this job
searching, when I finished the technical round at this company. They had 3
rounds, spanning 3 weeks. I did really well on the first round, but somehow got
a bad review on the second round and a rejection came. Another rejection at
another company where I thought I did the assessment test well also came. It
took me nearly two weeks to recover and continue my journey.

If I were to give any advice to people in this grueling job search at the midst
of an economic regression and countless company laid-offs, it's a shame that I
cannot do better than a generic LinkedIn post on don't lose your faith, keep
improving your skills, and keep looking.

I find myself maintaining hope easier after I understand that the job market is
a balance of supply and demand. Lower supply leads to higher demand and vice
versa. The situation right now is that the supply for developers up, while the
demand is down. The employers, who are on the demand side, can be more selective
for that. It is not a true reflection of your own skills and qualifications if
you are not selected.

Refreshing LinkedIn feeds again and again to find new opportunities is a sureway
to create your own anxiety and let the sense of hopelessness crawls. Instead of
that, putting some efforts into your side projects is a better time spending.
Finishing your undone readings is another choice. Both activities give you a
sense of progress and achievement, which is better than being directionless.

WAGMI (We're All Gonna Make It), I hope!

---

Sau khi được công ty cũ cho nghỉ, em có khoảng 2 tháng ngơi, và cũng dành gần 4
tháng tìm việc. Em nghĩ cái mà em chật vật nhất là giữ được hy vọng trong một
vòng tròn bất tận của tìm việc, ứng tuyển, phỏng vấn, khi mà nhận được rất nhiều
từ chối và ghosting.

Báo đài nói rằng thị trường việc làm đang không tốt lắm, đặc biệt là cho các bạn
mới ra trường, và em có thể phần nào đồng cảm, dù hiện tại em là một lập trình
viên ở độ giữa (mid-level developer). Em không thống kê đầy đủ về quá trình tìm
việc của mình, nhưng tự đềm sơ sơ được với >50 lần ứng tuyển, khoảng 12 cuộc
phỏng vấn, và ít hơn 4 vòng cuối, em nhận được vài lời đề nghị làm việc với mức
thu nhập ít hơn hiện tại. Trải nghiệm gần đây khó hơn và chọn lọc mang tính kỹ
càng hơn những lần tìm việc cũ của em rất nhiều, nên em cũng phần nào mường
tượng được thử thách mà các bạn mới ra trường đang gặp phải.

Em cũng trải qua một khoảng gian nan nhất từng thấy khi hoàn thành phỏng vấn ở
một công ty này. Quy trình vòng kỹ thuật này có 3 vòng nhỏ hơn, trải trong 3
tuần. Vòng 1 em làm rất tốt, nhưng đến vòng 2 thì mình lại có phản hồi không
tích cực và bị từ chối. Trong ngày hôm đó, em cũng nhận được thư từ chối ở một
công ty khác mà em đang làm bài đánh giá năng lực (em tự thấy mình làm khá tốt).
Trải nghiệm này làm em phải nghỉ gần 2 tuần trước khi có thể tiếp tục tìm việc.

Nếu như có một lời khuyên gì cho người phải kiếm một môi trường mới trong thời
kỳ kinh tế khó khăn và nhiều công ty cắt giảm nhân sự như thế này, rất tiếc là
em cũng không đưa ra được điều gì thể hơn ở việc không mất hy vọng, tiếp tục cải
thiện kỹ năng cá nhân, và tiếp tục tìm kiếm.

Em thấy bản thân mình giữ được hy vọng dễ hơn, sau khi hiểu rằng thị trường lao
động cũng là một cán cân cung cầu. Cung thấp dẫn đến cầu cao và ngược lại. Tình
huống hiện tại là nguồn cung lập trình viên cao, trong khi nhu cầu lại giảm.
Vì thế các nhà tuyển dụng ở bên cán cầu có thể có sự lựa chọn kỹ lưỡng hơn. Nếu
mình bị từ chối thì vấn đề không hoàn toàn nằm ở bản thân.

Kéo đi cuộn lại LinkedIn để tìm cơ hội mới chắc chắn sẽ làm bản thân thêm căng
thẳng và thấy vô vọng. Em nghĩ thay vì điều đó, mình nên dành thời gian làm thêm
một số dự án cá nhân ngoài. Đọc nốt những quyển sách dở mà mình không có thời
gian cũng là một lựa chọn khác. Cả hai hoạt động đều giúp mình có cảm giác tiến
độ và thành tựu, đỡ hơn sự bất định khi chờ đợi phản hồi công việc.

Ngày mai sẽ tươi sáng hơn!

